[Music]
thank you
hi everyone welcome to the podcast my
name is Dr Mark eatonson I'm a licensed
psychologist and author specializing in
the treatment of pathological narcissism
my book is called unmasking narcissism a
guide to understanding The Narcissist in
your life it's a compassionate guide to
understanding the psychology of
narcissism and you can find it for sale
on amazon.com and at Major book
retailers I'll also put a link in the
description below
so today I'd like to talk about
integration
apological narcissism is really a
condition in which different parts of
the self are not integrated
as I've touched on in other episodes
this is thought to be due to early
experiences of relational trauma and
emotional neglect that overwhelm the
developing self with feelings that can't
really be incorporated into the
individual's identity and self-image
creating the need for defensive
adaptations that protect the child's
identity from being overwhelmed by
negative representations of the self and
also of other people on whom the child
relies
When We're Young we're especially
dependent on our attachment
relationships to provide safety and
shelter from emotionally overwhelming
and distressing experiences young
children cling to a caregiver when they
hear a loud noise or when they see
something that frightens them whenever
they feel distraught
but the sorts of overwhelming
experiences that are thought to cause
pathological narcissism typically occur
within the context of the very
attachment relationships on which
children rely for safety and reassurance
and this leaves the child stuck
for example the child may feel enraged
at a caregiver but the only way of
coping was such a strong and
overwhelming and frankly frightening
feeling is to seek the safety and
reassurance of the very same caregiver
with whom they feel enraged and
similarly a young child may feel ashamed
or humiliated by an insensitive
caregiver but have nowhere to turn for
help in dealing with those feelings
in order to protect the attachment
relationship with their parent the child
begins to split off parts of the
developing self
you know if if Mom's not an emotionally
safe person but the child has to rely on
mom for emotional safety then their only
choice is to begin to cut themselves up
into separate pieces in order to protect
their ability to rely on mom even though
she isn't safe
the good memories and the good feelings
are kept walled off and separate from
the bad memories and the bad feelings in
effect this creates two internal models
of mom and two corresponding self-images
and this is the origin of splitting and
the discontinuity of internal experience
that is frequently encountered in all
personality disorders NPD included
the personality develops around the
imperative that attachment relationships
must be protected even if it comes at
the expense of the self
I once saw a parent handle this sort of
thing beautifully their toddler was
clearly angry with them even hitting the
parent on the arm
the parent caught the toddler's arm and
sternly said no no hitting
and the look on the toddler's face was
one of competing emotions the toddler
was enraged at their parent they were
ashamed at being reprimanded and they
were also in need of comfort
Ed by the very same person who's causing
you to feel the strong feelings of anger
or hatred or shame in the first place
and this is the predicament of all young
children
and here's what the parent did they saw
the look of Shame and anger on the
child's face and they mirrored it
briefly with their own expression then
they quickly shifted to a look of
concern and this gave the child a
feeling that their emotional experience
had been seen and comprehended by their
caregiver
and then the parent said are you mad at
me
because it's okay to be mad at me and
you can even say I'm mad at you
and there was a look of relief on the
child's face
the child said I'm mad at you
and the parent said see you can use your
words to tell me how you feel you don't
need to hit me because that hurts me and
it makes me feel mad too and the child
said okay
and then the parent checked in with the
child to see if they wanted a hug and it
turns out that they did
interaction was a microcosm of the way
that a good empathically attuned parent
or caregiver works within the attachment
relationship to help their child learn
to integrate opposite or overwhelming
emotions
the child learns that the feelings of
anger and the need for Comfort can
actually coexist and that both feelings
can be seen and understood by the very
person that the child is angry with
the parents response provides an ability
that the child lacks the ability to hold
opposing feeling States about the same
object together at the same time and it
also provides an effective solution to
the conflict a hug a literal Embrace of
all the parts of the child now this
response if repeated often enough during
their first years of life gets
internalized and the child learns to
integrate their own internal States this
ability becomes a consistent source of
flexible moderate responsiveness to
Life's challenges they learn to work out
conflicts within the very relationships
in which those conflicts occur and they
learn to recognize their conflicting
feelings and to self-soothe more
effectively
the psychoanalyst and pediatrician
Donald winicot called this sort of
responsiveness good enough mothering
a more accurate phrase would be good
enough parenting because the relational
Matrix that produces a well-integrated
self can be created and fostered by any
caregiver a father a grandparent an
adoptive or foster parent it doesn't
have to be a mother
when it got stressed the phrase good
enough because he was aware that all
parents lose their patience
everyone gets busy or distracted and we
all have our own challenges to overcome
nobody's perfect but luckily children
are resilient
in one training I attended for something
called mentalization-based therapy or
MBT which is a popular approach for
working with personality disordered
patients the instructors estimated that
caregivers need to be optimally
responsive at least 30 percent of the
time
now I'm not sure where they got that
figure I assume it was based on
Empirical research looking at attachment
relationships over time but whatever the
case the point that they were trying to
make was that there's actually a lot of
wiggle room
but eventually in the absence of good
enough parenting a sort of critical mass
is reached and the child must instead
rely on their own immature resources to
cope
they attempt to keep their hateful or
enraged or ashamed or dependent feelings
separate from their loving Happy
idealizing Feelings they learn to
compartmentalize these adaptations
happen very early in the developing self
so early in fact that they may be
entirely unconscious
the personality develops around the need
to keep the vulnerable depressed angry
and ashamed feelings separate from the
good feelings
and this is why pathological narcissism
involves alternating states of
vulnerability and grandiosity
for some individuals the vulnerable
state is more frequently present
and for others maybe with more
well-developed defenses the grandiose
feelings tend to hold sway
but for all individuals with
pathological narcissism or NPD there's a
split in the self between good and bad
self-images good and bad feelings about
others
and these splits inevitably influence
relationships
when the narcissistic person is in a
vulnerable state others are viewed
through that lens they're seen as cold
rejecting and sensitive humiliating
critical or unavailable
in a previous episode I talked about
resiliency
people with pathological narcissism and
NPD have a very specific kind of
resiliency they develop a grandiose
false self to help protect them from
these irresolvable relational binds when
all of the bad feelings are put into one
box then all that's left are good
feelings the individual attempts to
cling to these good feelings the
divisions in the self become like two
rooms one is filled with all the
terrible stuff but the other is filled
with all the amazingly good stuff
others are idealized the self is seen as
perfect or amazing or with Limitless
potential and the person comes to feel
like this good room with all this good
stuff is where they really belong that's
who they quote really are
and we call this feeling the false self
the person tries with all their might to
stay aligned with the grandiose and
idealized self-images that live in this
false self and to avoid ever being
identified with the bad feelings
these efforts tend to look like
hypersensitivity to rejection or
criticism in relationships where any
criticism is seen as an attempt to put
the person in the quote bad room and
this is why individuals with NPD can be
so reactive to perceived slights if left
to their own devices a person stuck in
this cycle of clinging to grandiosity
and avoiding vulnerability will burn
through relationship after relationship
always perceiving the other person as
amazing and perfect in the beginning I
believe pop psychology calls this love
bombing but it's not an intentionally
manipulative process it's a natural
consequence of the internal divisions
that exist within the self over time the
idealizations begin to get contaminated
the idealized person's imperfections
begin to accumulate as do the
narcissists own inadequacies and
insecurities
the narcissistic individual increasingly
begins to perceive the other person as
attempting to sort of make them feel
like the self that lives in the bad room
with the unsolvable relational conflicts
and negative feelings of Rage shame and
dependency
but instead of understanding that these
issues actually live within the self and
they're caused by splitting the
individual with NPD perceives them as
the other person's failings and
eventually the relationship becomes so
fraught that the person is sort of
discarded at least that's often how it
feels
but from the narcissist's perspective
they simply discovered that the other
person was never the perfect being they
originally thought they were the cycle
repeats over and over
and this is where therapy and self-work
become so important
healing NPD means slowly sometimes
painfully learning to integrate the
split off parts of the self it means
beginning to understand that nothing and
nobody is perfect including the self
the intoxicating highs of grandiose
experience exist in such a pure and
addictive form only because all of the
bad stuff has been split off and
compartmentalized into a different part
of the self
the self is perceived as great and
others are idealized because of a
distortion in perception not because
anything is really that great
in object relations Theory which is a
psychoanalytic school of thought this
realization is called the depressive
position
and it represents the dawn of a new more
mature awareness and integration within
the individual where they begin to see
themselves and other people as whole
objects combinations of good and bad
qualities and feelings that can't be
separated into good and bad parts
and this mode of being represents the
end of a certain kind of magical
thinking of the less mature defenses of
splitting doing and undoing projection
and denial
flaws in the self and in other people
must be contended with
they can't be erased through distorted
thinking or perceiving
the depressive position means working
with what is rather than what we wish
things were
but it also means that we can no longer
be sort of completely overwhelmed by bad
self-images or the feeling that others
are persecutory or out to get us we
begin to see all people ourselves
included as both good and bad as
necessarily imperfect
and just like the attuned parent could
see both the hating and loving parts of
the toddler and responded to each
simultaneously a person in the
depressive mode of thinking feeling and
perceiving can hold both vulnerable
strivings and grandiose feelings at the
same time
it's a bit disappointing to lose those
High Highs but the trade-off is getting
to have real relationships and never
again having to be stuck in that room
full of split off Badness
so how can you start on this path
well the next time you feel sort of on
top of the world try to regard that
feeling a little bit skeptically
notice if you tend to think to yourself
something like this is who I really am
when you feel that way
try to remember that that feeling is
actually a distortion and just like a
prism separates wavelengths of light
into their pure colors there's a
mechanism inside of you that has
separated your feelings and perceptions
into their sort of pure wavelengths the
idealizations and the grandiosity that
you experience are only part of the
story and if you could begin to have
that awareness actively in the moment
when you're feeling these feelings then
it might help to open the door just a
little bit for some other parts of you
to show up too
and the same thing goes for when you're
in a vulnerable state this too is not
the sort of quote real you
this represents parts of your experience
that have been split off and shoved into
a dark corner of your personality
the grandiose experiences never last
forever and neither do the vulnerable
experiences
try to think of these parts of you
compassionately
imagine the child I described earlier
caught between anger and the need for
reassurance between shame and the
feeling of needing to be comforted
try to see yourself as that child and
imagine how you might respond to them if
you were their caregiver
you probably do something like give them
a hug
it might sound corny to talk about you
know hugging your inner child but it's a
cliche for a reason there's a part of
you that needs help to integrate
conflicting feelings and at some point
you learned that you can't be quote a
good person and also feel depressed or
angry or ashamed or dependent at the
same time at some point you begin to
separate those experiences clinging to
one and pushing the other away
and that strategy worked when you were
young but it's no longer viable so long
as you were clinging to the good
feelings you're constantly running from
the bad ones
as in just about every Story Ever Told
there comes a time when you must stop
running stop clinging to the preferred
experience turn around and face
whatever's actually there and I
guarantee it's not the monster you
imagine it to be it's most likely a
little child hurt angry scared or alone
it's the feeling of Shame humiliation or
disappointment it's loss
try to embrace that child and those
feelings get as close to them as you can
without allowing them to overwhelm you
take baby steps toward that part of your
experience that needs someone to see and
to understand
a little compassion can actually go a
very long way
okay so that's it for today as always
please feel free to leave comments or
questions or suggestions for future
content and until next time take good
care
[Music]
foreign